Add react hooks chapter - extended (#109)
infinum/frontend-handbook: React/React hooks.md

### React hooks

> React Hooks were introduced in version 16.8.0 as Function Component counterpart of Class Component Lifecycle.  

Reviewer: Correct me if you think we need capitalisation here.

```suggestion
React Hooks were introduced in version 16.8.0 as function component counterpart of class component lifecycles.  
```

For more information, see the official [React Hooks API Reference](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html).

#### Hooks flow

> Before we start using hooks in React we need to understand the flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting, it is important to understand the flow of react hooks.
```

These suggestions are also "meh", but we should  somehow avoid repeating ourselves too much in consecutive sentences.

> Here is a flow diagram that explains the new flow of a Hooks component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a diagram that explains it visually:

![hooks-flow](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/donavon/hook-flow/master/hook-flow.png)
```

<br/>
<br/>
![hooks-flow](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/donavon/hook-flow/master/hook-flow.png)

> Most important thing here is to notice how "Run Effects" phase is executed last!

> Here is the code example that explains this flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a code example that explains this flow:
```

```jsx
export const MyComponent: FC = () => {
  // 1. Run Lazy initializers (i.e. () => 0)
  const [state, setState] = useState(() => 0); 

  const previousStateRef = useRef();

  useEffect(() => {
    // 3. Run effect
    previousStateRef.current = state;
  }); // no deps array, we want this to be called on every render!

  // 2. Render
  return (
    <>
      Prev: {previousStateRef.current ?? "undefined"}
      <br />
      Current: {state}
      <br />
      <button onClick={() => setState(1)}>Update</button>
    </>
  );
}
```

In the "Mount" phase you will see:
```
Prev: undefined
Current: 0
```

> This is because `useEffect` is called after the first render and also assigning values to `ref` does not trigger re-render, instead, the value is populated and waiting for next update phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because `useEffect` is called after the first render and because assigning a value to `ref` does not trigger a re-render - instead, the value is populated and waiting for the next update phase.
```

> When button is clicked React will trigger `Update` phase and result will be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `button` is clicked, React will trigger the `update` phase and the result will be:
```

}
```

> For non-primitive values like objects, arrays and functions, React will do a reference comparison using [Object.is()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/is). This means that we must provide the same reference of `objectProp`, `arrayProp`, `functionProp` to `Child` on every re-render if we don't want to trigger `useEffect` every time. This can be achieved by extracting them outside component function or wrapping them in `useMemo` or `useCallback`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For non-primitive values like objects, arrays and functions, React will do a reference comparison using [Object.is()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/is). This means that we must provide the same reference of `objectProp`, `arrayProp`, `functionProp` to `Child` on every re-render if we don't want to trigger `useEffect` every time. This can be achieved by extracting them outside of the component or wrapping them in `useMemo` or `useCallback`.  
```

> There is [JavaScript Records & Tuples Proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-record-tuple) which will invalidate above arguments and make thing simpler.

```jsx
const Child: FC = ({ objectProp, arrayProp, functionProp }) => {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Runs only when `objectProp`, `arrayProp` or `functionProp` reference changes
  }, [objectProp, arrayProp, functionProp])

  return ...;
}

// BAD
const Parent: FC = () => {
  // here we could have some code unrelated to Child component that could trigger re-render of Parent

  return (
    <Child 
      objectProp={{ a: 'a' }} 
      arrayProp={['a']} 
      functionProp={() => 'a'} 
    />
    // some other components...
  );
}

// GOOD
const objectProp = { a: 'a' };
const arrayProp = ['a'];

const Parent: FC = () => {
  // here we could have some code unrelated to Child component that could trigger re-render of Parent

  const functionProp = useCallback(() => 'a', []);

  return (
    <Child 
      objectProp={objectProp} 
      arrayProp={arrayProp} 
      functionProp={functionProp} 
    />
    // some other components...
  );
}

> // FUTURE with Records & Tuples (finger crossed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// FUTURE with Records & Tuples
```

or

```suggestion
// FUTURE with Records & Tuples (fingers crossed)
```

Remember to be mindful of user experience on slow connections. The JavaScript code may load significantly later than the initial HTML render, so if you render something different in the client-only pass, the transition can be jarring. However, if executed well, it may be beneficial to render a “shell” of the application on the server, and only show some of the extra widgets on the client. To learn how to do this without getting the markup mismatch issues, refer to the explanation in the previous paragraph

```jsx
const useIsClient = () => {
  const [isClient, setClient] = useState(false);

  useEffect(() => {
    setClient(true)
  }, []);

  return isClient;
}

export const Component: FC = () => {
  const isClient = useIsClient();

  return <div>{isClient ? 'Client' : 'Server'}</div>
}
```

> #### Wrap functions with `useCallback` it they can cause large subtrees to re-render too often

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Wrap functions with `useCallback` if they can cause large subtrees to re-render too often
```

React is good at optimizing, so if you prematurely decide to wrap a function inside a `useCallback`, often you will end up with slower performance. This is because memoization is expensive. In most cases, even if you improve performance, it will be an insignificant gain compared to simple and maintainable code you had before.

```jsx
export const StepButton: FC = ({ onClick, stepSize }) => {
  /** 
  * You don't have to optimise (wrap in useCallback) because onClick and stepSize 
  * are the same on each render and React can optimise this by itself.
  **/
  return <button onClick={() => onClick(stepSize)}>Increment for {stepSize}</button>;
}

// GOOD
export const MyComponent: FC = () => {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

  const increment = useCallback((stepSize) => { setCount((previousCount) => previousCount + stepSize) }, []);

  return (
    <div>
      <div>Count {count}</div>
      <StepButton onClick={increment} stepSize={2} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

#### Hooks encapsulation

Common problem with hooks is that the components using them could go out of control and become unreadable and messy. 

> That happens when you have multiple `useEffect` and `useCallback` in you Function Component body, and that happens often if you are building real world product. To overcome this problem we can do the same thing as we would do the Class Component, split things in smaller chunks of logic and put them somewhere else, i.e. private methods of Class Component or custom hooks in Function Components.

Author: or `multiple invocations of`

The Problem:

This is the continuation of previous section, but we will expand it with some additional requirements.  

> We need to add input field in which we can input the thing we are counting, and add decrement and reset handlers for counter.

Reviewer: I'm guessing this is what you meant here.

```suggestion
We need to add an input field for setting the description of the value that we are counting, with decrement and reset handlers for the counter.
```

  const increment = useCallback((stepSize) => { setCount((previousCount) => previousCount + stepSize) }, []);
  const decrement = useCallback((stepSize) => { setCount((previousCount) => previousCount + stepSize) }, []);
  const reset = useCallback(() => { setCount(0) }, []);

  const handleInputChange = useCallback(e => {
    setInputState(e.target.value);
  }, []);

  return (
    <div>
      <div>
        <label htmlFor="entity">Entity</label>
        <input
          type="text"
          id="entity"
          onChange={handleInputChange}
          value={inputState}
        />
      </div>
      <div>Count {count}</div>
      <StepButton onClick={increment} stepSize={2} />
      <StepButton onClick={decrement} stepSize={-2} />
      <button onClick={reset}>Reset</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

You can see that our component becomes messy and hard to understand. There is a lot of code in the body of the function which increase our [cognitive load](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_load). To fix this issue we can **encapsulate** our **elements of concern** into a separate _chunks of work_, i.e. custom hooks.

The Solution:

```jsx

> const useCount = (initialState = 0) => {

Reviewer 2: Missing stepSize in function params

Author: noup! read it again :D

Reviewer 2: Ahaaa 🙈

  const [state, setState] = useState(() => initialState);

  const handlers = useMemo(
    () => ({
      increment: (stepSize = 1) => {
        setState(previousCount => previousCount + stepSize)
      },
      decrement: (stepSize = -1) => { 
        setState((previousCount) =>  previousCount + stepSize)
      },
      reset: () => {
        setState(0)
      }
    }),
    [initialState]
  );

  return [state, handlers];
}

const useInput = (initialState = '') => {
  const [state, setState] = useState(() => initialState);

  const handlers = useMemo(() => ({
    handleInputChange: (event) => {
      setState(event.target.value);
    }

>   })), []);

Reviewer 2: Are we missing initialState in dep array?

```suggestion
  })), [initialState]);
```
